pages/lab1_visualization.md, before:

# Lab 1: Graphing Data I

>The commonality between science and art is in trying to see profoundly - to develop strategies of seeing and showing.
—Edward Tufte

As we have found out from the textbook and lecture, when we measure things, we get lots of numbers. Too many. Sometimes so many your head explodes just thinking about them. **One of the most helpful things** you can do to begin to make sense of these numbers, is to look at them in graphical form.

<!-- ![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-hist-life.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year-saudi.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year-3-arab-states.png) -->

## General Goals

Our general goals for this first lab are to get your feet wet, so to speak. We’ll do these things:

1. Load in some data to [jamovi](https://www.jamovi.org/)
2. Talk a little bit about how the data is structured
3. Make graphs of the data so we can look at it and make sense of it.

Visualization is so important that we will continue to make graphs in the next lab.

### Sources of data for this lab

1. Data for employment is fake, automatically generated by a [computer program that I wrote](/psy-466/data/make-employment-data.R). The .csv file can be found here: [employment data](/psy-466/data/employment.csv)

2. Data for the ad groups (or identifiers) that Facebook sells to advertisers was obtained from [ProPublica's Data Store](https://www.propublica.org/datastore/dataset/facebook-ad-categories). The .csv file can be found here: [facebook data](/psy-466/data/fb-ad-groups.csv)

### CSV file format

Data in our labs will be shared as CSV files. CSV stands for comma-separated values, and these types of files can be easily identified by the .csv file extension in their file name. Why CSV? It is one of the simplest file formats and most popular file formats for data. CSV files can be read by every computer application that involves data analysis: SPSS, Stata, Excel, Google Sheets, you name it. We'll be doing all of our statistical analyses using the jamovi application and jamovi can also read .csv files. CSV files also have the advantage that you can also just look at them in a simple word processor.

So what's in a CSV file?
Here's an example:

```
participant, stimulus, reaction_time
1, violent, 200
2, neutral, 500
```

The first thing is usually a row of headers, which are short descriptions of different variables. Each header is separated by a comma. In this example, there are 3 variables: participant, stimulus and reaction time. Each subsequent line is a row of values separated by commas. Looking at this, we can guess that participant 1 reacted very quickly to a violent stimulus, maybe the image of bloody knife. The next line suggests that participant 2 reacted more slowly to a neutral stimulus, perhaps the image of a computer. However, I am just guessing. Whoever made the CSV file should provide additional information to explain how these data were collected and what the different variables mean. This additional information is usually available in another file, like a website or PDF document for example. For our labs, I will describe each data file as much as is necessary for you to understand the required analyses. I will also provide links to additional information for those who are curious to learn more!

If you open up the above CSV file in a spreadsheet application like Excel, you might get something like this:

| participant | stimulus | reaction_time |
| ---: | ---: | ---: |
| 1 | violent | 200 |
| 2 | neutral | 500 |

Notice that data in a CSV file are **tabular**:
- each column represents a variable (described by its header)
- each row represents the values of an object for each variable
  - in the example above, each object is a person
- the number of values in each row matches the number of variables (headers)
  - in our example, 3 values for each person
- variable names should be informative

<!-- 3. Gapminder data from the gapminder project (copied from [this source](https://github.com/jennybc/gapminder)) can be downloaded in .csv format here: [gapminder data](/psy-466/data/gapminder.csv) -->

## jamovi

### Download the lab templates

You will be completing each lab by writing your code and notes in an R Markdown document.

### Get some data
Please download the employment and facebook data and save them somewhere on your computer. Preferably, these data will be in the same folder that you will save work for this lab.
Now load the employment data into **jamovi** like this:

![Now load this data into jamovi.](/psy-466/assets/V1-open-file.gif)

### Employment data
This fake data lists employment status and gender for a sample of people from [Wakanda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wakanda).
```
"ID","gender","employment"
1,"male","full-time"
2,"male","full-time"
3,"male","part-time"
```
How many people are in this sample? And what are the different employment statuses? Try this on your own then [click here for the answer.](/psy-466/assets/answers1.csv)

We could simply look through the raw data. But counting can take a lot of time, and we would probably make mistakes. So we want the computer to do this stuff for us.

#### Now many people in this sample?

***Analyses >> Exploration >> Descriptives***

In the left panel, put gender under "variables". Using employment instead also works the same.
In the right panel, you can now see that N = 400.
In other words, we have 400 people in this data. However, we also have 91 people that appear to be *Missing*. What's going on here? Let's get back to this later.

Notice that there are some other things listed in our table that do not have values, like the mean. Only N (number of objects) and Missing (number of missing values) makes sense for our Nominal variables. So let's get rid of these in our table. Everything that appears in our table is selected in the left panel under **statistics**. We can simply uncheck items that we do not want included, like mean.

##### Export APA table into Word
Are you doing your senior project now, or will be doing it in the near future? Chances are you'll be including a table in your manuscript that is formatted according to APA guidelines. Well, we can just copy the table from jamovi into a Word document. Do this now! Notice that the copy of your table is not an image, but an actual table that you can edit!

**Copy table to Word**

#### What are the different employment statuses?

**Data >> Setup**

Now click on the column header for employment (bottom panel) or simply shift left or right toward employment in the top panel. Now we can see all of the different employment statuses under levels in the top panel. What are they?

Now is a good time to discuss employment status. You might be wondering about the difference between unemployed and "not looking". Unemployed people are currently out of work but trying to find work, whereas people who are not looking are simply not looking for work. Perhaps your wife is very rich and you want to spend all of your time playing video games? If that is you then technically you are not unemployed.

#### How many people are in the different employment categories?
To answer this question, let's make our first graph. Just follow the procedure shown in this animation:

![how to get a simple frequency plot](/psy-466/assets/V2-counts-explore-employment.gif)

I will be making animations like this for some of our labs, especially the first few labs when you are still learning how to use **jamovi**. As we progress, you will be able to figure things out on your own.

Using a similar procedure as the one described for tables, you can copy this graph. Then you can paste it into Word for example. However, it might be good to export the graph as a separate file. This is what your graph should look like:

![simple frequency plot](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_explore.svg)


#### A similar graph using a different module
I chose **jamovi** instead of a similar application called **JASP** because it offers more options for visualization. Let's explore some options in this lab.

Hopefully, you've installed the **Flexplot** module already. Once you have, then just follow the procedure shown in this animation to make our alternate graph:

![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V3-counts-flex-strange-employment.gif)

Here's the resulting graph:

![NA as category](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_flex_strange.svg)

But what is this NA nonsense?

Graphs are really useful for identifying and illustrating patterns in your data. However, they are also useful for seeing if there is anything funny with your data! That's what happened here! Clearly there is something funny going on. We already knew about this funny business earlier. But with more complicated data sets sometimes visualizing your data is the only way to spot funny business.

So what's actually going on? Open up employment.csv in a simple word processor and scroll down to the end of the file. There you will see that there are 91 rows of commas without values, like this:
```
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
```

We can also see this in the spreadsheet part of **jamovi** but you have to really know what you're looking for:

![](/psy-466/assets/missing-rows-jamovi.png)

Notice that the row numbers are gray from row 492 onward. They should be gray from row 401 onward. That means **jamovi** thinks there are 91 people with completely missing data. Maybe there are. We would have to ask the person who collected these data!

Anyway, we have absolutely no data for these rows so let's exclude them form all of our analyses. How do we do that?

#### Filtering out empty rows
Follow the procedure in this animation:

![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V4-filtering-employment.gif)

In words, clicked the Filters button under Data and typed the following as a ROW FILTER:
```
ROW() < 401
```
Then I hit the ENTER button. That's it!

If you go the the spreadsheet part of **jamovi** you can see that there are now green check marks for all the rows included in analyses, and red x's for all the rows excluded from analyses:

![](/psy-466/assets/filtering-seen-in-spreadsheet.png)

Finally, our graph has now been updated to reflect the exclusion of empty rows:

![some words](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_flex.svg)

In other words, no more bar for NA!

<!-- **************************** -->
<!-- **************************** -->
<!-- **************************** -->

### The information about you that Facebook buys from marketing companies

#### Filtering out unknown companies
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V5-filtering.gif)
<!-- ![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_partner.png) -->
![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_flex_partner.png)
##### Types by different companies
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V6-type-by-partner.gif)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_flex_type_partner.png)
Let's refer to this graph as **type-by-company**.

##### Companies by different types
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V7-partner-by-type.gif)
<!-- ![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_type_partner.png) -->
![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_partner_type.png)
Let's refer to this graph as **company-by-type**.

### Generalization Exercise
(1 point - Pass/Fail)

The last graph we made (**company-by-type**) compared companies for each of the different types of identifier. Suppose that the only identifier type we care about is *behaviors*. We want a simpler graph that looks like this:
![these words do not show](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_behaviors_only.png)
Please recreate this graph.
HINT: You can use **filtering**.

### Writing assignment

1. Which company sells the most diverse range of identifier types?

2. Which of these 2 graphs is most appropriate for answering the previous question? **type-by-company** or **company-by-type**?

3. Which company provides the most information about different types of moms?

4. Which of these 2 graphs is most appropriate for answering the previous question? **type-by-company** or **company-by-type**?

The answers to each of these questions are worth .50 points each, for a total of 2 points

**Rubric**

General grading.

- You will receive 0 points for missing answers (say, if you do not answer question c, then you will receive 0 out .50 points for that question)
- You must write in complete sentences. Point form sentences will be given 0 points.
- Completely incorrect answers will receive 0 points. For example, if you incorrectly describe what the x and y-axes refer to, then you will receive 0 points for that question.
- If your answer is generally correct but very difficult to understand and unclear you may receive half points for the question

Commit message:

additions to facebook content of lab1...md

pages/lab1_visualization.md, after:

# Lab 1: Graphing Data I

>The commonality between science and art is in trying to see profoundly - to develop strategies of seeing and showing.
—Edward Tufte

As we have found out from the textbook and lecture, when we measure things, we get lots of numbers. Too many. Sometimes so many your head explodes just thinking about them. **One of the most helpful things** you can do to begin to make sense of these numbers, is to look at them in graphical form.

<!-- ![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-hist-life.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year-saudi.png)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/gapminder-scatter-life-year-3-arab-states.png) -->

## General Goals

Our general goals for this first lab are to get your feet wet, so to speak. We’ll do these things:

1. Load in some data to [jamovi](https://www.jamovi.org/)
2. Talk a little bit about how the data is structured
3. Make graphs of the data so we can look at it and make sense of it.

Visualization is so important that we will continue to make graphs in the next lab.

### Sources of data for this lab

1. Data for employment is fake, automatically generated by a [computer program that I wrote](/psy-466/data/make-employment-data.R). The .csv file can be found here: [employment data](/psy-466/data/employment.csv)

2. Data for the ad groups (or identifiers) that Facebook sells to advertisers was obtained from [ProPublica's Data Store](https://www.propublica.org/datastore/dataset/facebook-ad-categories). The .csv file can be found here: [facebook data](/psy-466/data/fb-ad-groups.csv)

### CSV file format

Data in our labs will be shared as CSV files. CSV stands for comma-separated values, and these types of files can be easily identified by the .csv file extension in their file name. Why CSV? It is one of the simplest file formats and most popular file formats for data. CSV files can be read by every computer application that involves data analysis: SPSS, Stata, Excel, Google Sheets, you name it. We'll be doing all of our statistical analyses using the jamovi application and jamovi can also read .csv files. CSV files also have the advantage that you can also just look at them in a simple word processor.

So what's in a CSV file?
Here's an example:

```
participant, stimulus, reaction_time
1, violent, 200
2, neutral, 500
```

The first thing is usually a row of headers, which are short descriptions of different variables. Each header is separated by a comma. In this example, there are 3 variables: participant, stimulus and reaction time. Each subsequent line is a row of values separated by commas. Looking at this, we can guess that participant 1 reacted very quickly to a violent stimulus, maybe the image of bloody knife. The next line suggests that participant 2 reacted more slowly to a neutral stimulus, perhaps the image of a computer. However, I am just guessing. Whoever made the CSV file should provide additional information to explain how these data were collected and what the different variables mean. This additional information is usually available in another file, like a website or PDF document for example. For our labs, I will describe each data file as much as is necessary for you to understand the required analyses. I will also provide links to additional information for those who are curious to learn more!

If you open up the above CSV file in a spreadsheet application like Excel, you might get something like this:

| participant | stimulus | reaction_time |
| ---: | ---: | ---: |
| 1 | violent | 200 |
| 2 | neutral | 500 |

Notice that data in a CSV file are **tabular**:
- each column represents a variable (described by its header)
- each row represents the values of an object for each variable
  - in the example above, each object is a person
- the number of values in each row matches the number of variables (headers)
  - in our example, 3 values for each person
- variable names should be informative

<!-- 3. Gapminder data from the gapminder project (copied from [this source](https://github.com/jennybc/gapminder)) can be downloaded in .csv format here: [gapminder data](/psy-466/data/gapminder.csv) -->

## jamovi

### Download the lab templates

You will be completing each lab by writing your code and notes in an R Markdown document.

### Get some data
Please download the employment and facebook data and save them somewhere on your computer. Preferably, these data will be in the same folder that you will save work for this lab.
Now load the employment data into **jamovi** like this:

![Now load this data into jamovi.](/psy-466/assets/V1-open-file.gif)

### Employment data
This fake data lists employment status and gender for a sample of people from [Wakanda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wakanda).
```
"ID","gender","employment"
1,"male","full-time"
2,"male","full-time"
3,"male","part-time"
```
How many people are in this sample? And what are the different employment statuses? Try this on your own then [click here for the answer.](/psy-466/assets/answers1.csv)

We could simply look through the raw data. But counting can take a lot of time, and we would probably make mistakes. So we want the computer to do this stuff for us.

#### Now many people in this sample?

***Analyses >> Exploration >> Descriptives***

In the left panel, put gender under "variables". Using employment instead also works the same.
In the right panel, you can now see that N = 400.
In other words, we have 400 people in this data. However, we also have 91 people that appear to be *Missing*. What's going on here? Let's get back to this later.

Notice that there are some other things listed in our table that do not have values, like the mean. Only N (number of objects) and Missing (number of missing values) makes sense for our Nominal variables. So let's get rid of these in our table. Everything that appears in our table is selected in the left panel under **statistics**. We can simply uncheck items that we do not want included, like mean.

##### Export APA table into Word
Are you doing your senior project now, or will be doing it in the near future? Chances are you'll be including a table in your manuscript that is formatted according to APA guidelines. Well, we can just copy the table from jamovi into a Word document. Do this now! Notice that the copy of your table is not an image, but an actual table that you can edit!

**Copy table to Word**

#### What are the different employment statuses?

**Data >> Setup**

Now click on the column header for employment (bottom panel) or simply shift left or right toward employment in the top panel. Now we can see all of the different employment statuses under levels in the top panel. What are they?

Now is a good time to discuss employment status. You might be wondering about the difference between unemployed and "not looking". Unemployed people are currently out of work but trying to find work, whereas people who are not looking are simply not looking for work. Perhaps your wife is very rich and you want to spend all of your time playing video games? If that is you then technically you are not unemployed.

#### How many people are in the different employment categories?
To answer this question, let's make our first graph. Just follow the procedure shown in this animation:

![how to get a simple frequency plot](/psy-466/assets/V2-counts-explore-employment.gif)

I will be making animations like this for some of our labs, especially the first few labs when you are still learning how to use **jamovi**. As we progress, you will be able to figure things out on your own.

Using a similar procedure as the one described for tables, you can copy this graph. Then you can paste it into Word for example. However, it might be good to export the graph as a separate file. This is what your graph should look like:

![simple frequency plot](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_explore.svg)


#### A similar graph using a different module
I chose **jamovi** instead of a similar application called **JASP** because it offers more options for visualization. Let's explore some options in this lab.

Hopefully, you've installed the **Flexplot** module already. Once you have, then just follow the procedure shown in this animation to make our alternate graph:

![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V3-counts-flex-strange-employment.gif)

Here's the resulting graph:

![NA as category](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_flex_strange.svg)

But what is this NA nonsense?

Graphs are really useful for identifying and illustrating patterns in your data. However, they are also useful for seeing if there is anything funny with your data! That's what happened here! Clearly there is something funny going on. We already knew about this funny business earlier. But with more complicated data sets sometimes visualizing your data is the only way to spot funny business.

So what's actually going on? Open up employment.csv in a simple word processor and scroll down to the end of the file. There you will see that there are 91 rows of commas without values, like this:
```
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
```

We can also see this in the spreadsheet part of **jamovi** but you have to really know what you're looking for:

![](/psy-466/assets/missing-rows-jamovi.png)

Notice that the row numbers are gray from row 492 onward. They should be gray from row 401 onward. That means **jamovi** thinks there are 91 people with completely missing data. Maybe there are. We would have to ask the person who collected these data!

Anyway, we have absolutely no data for these rows so let's exclude them form all of our analyses. How do we do that?

#### Filtering out empty rows
Follow the procedure in this animation:

![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V4-filtering-employment.gif)

In words, clicked the Filters button under Data and typed the following as a ROW FILTER:
```
ROW() < 401
```
Then I hit the ENTER button. That's it!

If you go the the spreadsheet part of **jamovi** you can see that there are now green check marks for all the rows included in analyses, and red x's for all the rows excluded from analyses:

![](/psy-466/assets/filtering-seen-in-spreadsheet.png)

Finally, our graph has now been updated to reflect the exclusion of empty rows:

![some words](/psy-466/assets/employment_hist_flex.svg)

In other words, no more bar for NA!

<!-- **************************** -->
<!-- **************************** -->
<!-- **************************** -->

### The information about you that Facebook buys from marketing companies
According to [ProPublica](https://www.propublica.org/datastore/dataset/facebook-ad-categories), our [facebook data](/psy-466/assets/fb-ad-groups.csv):
> ... contains data scraped from the company's ad buying portal. This table shows what audiences Facebook allows ad buyers to target.

What does this mean?

Facebook was only just beginning to become popular when I was in graduate school. Now it is quite normal for people to have a facebook account. Apparently, facebook is [the most popular social media platform in the UAE](https://www.arabianbusiness.com/technology/448399-facebook-is-uaes-most-popular-social-media-platform-report). So I'm going to just assume you know what facebook is.

And I imagine that you have at least a fuzzy idea of how facebook makes money by selling information about you to advertisers.

But you may not be aware that facebook also buys information about you from special companies called [data brokers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K1m_cigA988).

In other words, facebook has access to information about you that is collected outside of what is in your facebook account.

Altogether, the info facebook has about you can be surprisingly detailed. Let's take a look.

CURRENT WORK HERE

#### Filtering out unknown companies
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V5-filtering.gif)
<!-- ![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_partner.png) -->
![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_flex_partner.png)
##### Types by different companies
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V6-type-by-partner.gif)
![some words](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_flex_type_partner.png)
Let's refer to this graph as **type-by-company**.

##### Companies by different types
![Loading our farm data](/psy-466/assets/V7-partner-by-type.gif)


This graph is very large so [click here](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_partner_type.png) to view this figure in its own webpage.

Let's refer to this graph as **company-by-type**.

### Generalization Exercise
(1 point - Pass/Fail)

The last graph we made (**company-by-type**) compared companies for each of the different types of identifier. Suppose that the only identifier type we care about is *behaviors*. We want a simpler graph that looks like this:
![these words do not show](/psy-466/assets/facebook_hist_explore_behaviors_only.png)
Please recreate this graph.
HINT: You can use **filtering**.

### Writing assignment

1. Which company sells the most diverse range of identifier types?

2. Which of these 2 graphs is most appropriate for answering the previous question? **type-by-company** or **company-by-type**?

3. Which company provides the most information about different types of moms?

4. Which of these 2 graphs is most appropriate for answering the previous question? **type-by-company** or **company-by-type**?

The answers to each of these questions are worth .50 points each, for a total of 2 points

**Rubric**

General grading.

- You will receive 0 points for missing answers (say, if you do not answer question c, then you will receive 0 out .50 points for that question)
- You must write in complete sentences. Point form sentences will be given 0 points.
- Completely incorrect answers will receive 0 points. For example, if you incorrectly describe what the x and y-axes refer to, then you will receive 0 points for that question.
- If your answer is generally correct but very difficult to understand and unclear you may receive half points for the question
